SINGAPORE — When opposition parties failed to make a dent at the ballot box during the 2015 General Election (GE), analysts predicted that the smaller outfits would consolidate or reorganise to hold their own against the big guns.

ADVERTISEMENT
At the time, with the exception of the Workers’ Party (WP), the Singapore Democratic Party (SDP) and the Singapore People’s Party (SPP), all other opposition parties registered less than 30 per cent of the vote share at the constituencies where they stood.

Yet, for the GE this year, the number of opposition parties has grown — from eight in 2015 to 10. There were six in 2011.

ADVERTISEMENT

Their showing at the latest polls has also been fairly successful, with the opposition parties registering close to 39 per cent of the overall vote share. None of the parties, except one, lost their election deposits in the constituencies they contested.

Candidates need to garner a minimum of 12.5 per cent of the vote to avoid forfeiting the S$13,500 deposit.

Read also: PAP has to better understand millennials to win back votes, says Ambassador-at-Large Chan Heng Chee

The sole party to lose its deposit was Peoples Voice, which scored 12.18 per cent of the vote in a three-way fight in Pasir Ris-Punggol Group Representation Constituency (GRC). Mr Cheang Peng Wah, an independent candidate, also lost his deposit in a three-cornered fight in Pioneer Single Member Constituency (SMC).

Even newcomers Red Dot United, which got its registration approved just two weeks before Nomination Day, was able to secure about 25 per cent of the vote in Jurong GRC.

TODAY looks at why opposition parties continue to enter the fray despite bigger parties dominating the scene, and if predictions of an opposition consolidation will come to pass.

Read also: ELD apologises for ‘human error and miscommunication’ which resulted in voter being unable to cast her ballot

INCENTIVES TO CONTEST

Political analysts said that there are still incentives for new opposition parties to form, even as more established outfits strengthened their foothold in the political scene.

Dr Gillian Koh from the Institute of Policy Studies pointed to the provision of 12 Non-Constituency Member of Parliament (NCMP) seats, which give opposition candidates an opportunity to be an NCMP even if they lost.

Read also: Progress Singapore Party’s Leong Mun Wai, Hazel Poa to take up NCMP seats

In this GE, the Progress Singapore Party (PSP) headed by former People’s Action Party (PAP) Member of Parliament Tan Cheng Bock was able to secure two NCMP seats in its first showing at the elections.

With this GE campaign mostly taking place online, the cost of taking part was also greatly reduced.

Ms Michelle Lee, Red Dot United’s chairman, said that had GE2020 been a conventional election, the month-old party would have struggled to raise enough money to fund the cost of holding physical rallies.

Read also: Labour movement, national employers' federation declare support for Ng Chee Meng as NTUC secretary-general


Candidates from Red Dot United at Nan Hua High school on Nomination Day, June 30, 2020. Photo: Ili Nadhirah Mansor/TODAY

CONSOLIDATION STILL THE WAY FORWARD?

Political commentator Eugene Tan said that with a crowded political landscape, it is harder for the smaller parties to remain relevant.

Assoc Prof Tan, who is a law professor at the Singapore Management University, believes that consolidation, such as through a formal coalition, a loose alliance or a merger with other parties, is one way forward as this would allow them to pool resources.

However, the coalition members have to set aside individual party and personal interests to create a successful alliance, he added. 

Some opposition parties interviewed by TODAY said that they would continue to push for a coalition in the lead-up to the next GE.

Mr Goh Meng Seng, the secretary-general of People's Power Party (PPP), said that without any “star candidates”, having a bigger-sized coalition would help to inspire voters’ confidence in the parties. It will also help smaller parties such as his gain greater media exposure, he added.

An attempt by PPP to form an opposition bloc with the Singapore Democratic Alliance (SDA), PPP, Reform Party and the now-disbanded Singaporeans First failed to materialise during GE2020 after SDA pulled out.

However, Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) secretary-general Mohamad Hamim Aliyas remains optimistic that an opposition alliance between his outfit, PPP and Reform Party can be formalised and registered within the next year.

Having lobbied for an alliance among several opposition parties two years ago, Mr Lim Tean, the leader of Peoples Voice, is no longer keen on the idea.

While he had thought at first that it would be good for the opposition parties to come together, Mr Lim said the “selfish interest” of individual parties meant that opposition unity remains a far-fetched idea.

“I now believe that instead of pursuing a fruitless cause for opposition unity, it is better that we work towards a multi-party democracy in Singapore, which is what is happening throughout the world. We can get more diverse views, and diversity is what Singaporeans want,” he said.

SMALLER PARTIES HAVE TO 'RAISE STANDARDS'

Coalition talks aside, analysts said that the smaller opposition parties will have to raise their standards to stand out from the crowd.

Dr Felix Tan, associate lecturer in international relations at SIM Global Education, said that these parties need to groom members and candidates instead of coming across as “fly-by-night” entities. They will also have to be less antagonistic in their messaging and appeal to voters rationally instead.

Assistant Professor Walid Jumblatt Abdullah of Nanyang Technological University’s School of Social Sciences said that the smaller parties should also consolidate their resources to contest in either one GRC or SMC to achieve a breakthrough like the WP did in 2011.

These parties should also be clearer about what they stand for, rather than what they stand against.

So long as the bigger opposition parties such as WP lack the resources to contest every seat in an election, there will continue to be space for smaller opposition parties, Asst Prof Walid said.
Read more at https://www.todayonline.com/singapore/why-new-opposition-parties-continue-toss-their-hats-ringSINGAPORE — Singapore was at its “youth peak” in the recently concluded General Election (GE), with those aged between 25 and 35 forming the biggest bulge in its population pyramid in 2020, Ambassador-at-Large Chan Heng Chee said.

And the ruling People’s Action Party (PAP) will have to understand this group better to “win back their vote”, she added. Professor Chan was delivering an online lecture titled, Singapore in a Time of Flux: Optimism from the Jaws of Gloom, on Wednesday (July 15).

ADVERTISEMENT
This was the last of her lecture series as an SR Nathan fellow with the Institute of Policy Studies (IPS), a think-tank from the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy at the National University of Singapore (NUS). 

Prof Chan started her lecture with an analysis of the GE2020 results, which saw PAP lose another Group Representation Constituency (GRC) and taking 61.24 per cent of the popular vote — a drop from the 69.9 per cent it achieved in GE2015 and is its second lowest overall vote share since the country's independence.

ADVERTISEMENT

Prof Chan said that the younger generation, which she termed the “Zoomer generation”, prefers “personal narratives and ‘I feel your pain’ connectivity, approachability and authenticity”.

She said: “The Workers' Party understood this and chose youthful candidates and issues for the Zoomer generation... This online digital politics is now the new retail politics — up close and personal.”

Read also: Singapore will not be put in position to choose between US, China ‘like a marriage’: Ambassador-at-Large Chan Heng Chee

The GE saw WP achieve its best ever electoral showing, winning 10 seats including four in the newly formed Sengkang GRC.

‘MILLENNIALS WILL CONTINUE TO SUPPORT DIVERSE VOICES’

During a press conference held after the final election results were out, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong said that the outcome reflected a desire by younger voters for a greater opposition presence in Parliament.

Read also: GE2020 commentary: Assessing the voters’ message to PAP (and other parties)

In her lecture, Prof Chan reiterated: “Clearly, this age group bought the opposition message of the need for diverse voices in Parliament and the need for checks and balances.”

She added that while it has been “conventional wisdom” that people become more conservative as they grow older, the millennials in Singapore will buck this trend as youth elsewhere have already demonstrated a “distinct and increasingly liberal outlook”.

She cited from a Pew Research report that suggested that American millennials and Generation X-ers are different from the Boomers and the Silent Generation, who are 56 years old and above.

Read also: GE2020: Clear messages sent by voters, 'soul searching and reflection' needed: Shanmugam

“I expect our millennials will continue to support diverse voices and an opposition in Parliament as a good thing even as they age,” Prof Chan predicted.

“They will have specific personal concerns, too, in different phases of their lives. The incumbent party will have to understand this group better to win back their vote.”

NEW POLITICAL CULTURE EMERGING

Read also: GE2020: PAP wins ‘clear mandate’ in historic Covid elections, but couldn’t prevent WP from making further inroads

Prof Chan also said it was evident that a new political culture is emerging.

“On the one hand is the culture of government that emphasises strong government, effectiveness, a legalistic culture, delivery of public goods and services, and a better life for the people. Critics have characterised the PAP political style as paternalistic,” she said. 

“On the other hand, many Singaporeans invoke democracy and want to see Singapore evolve into a full-fledged democracy.”

Read also: GE2020: ‘Whole country has to unite’ — WP will work with PAP, other opposition parties, says Pritam Singh

She noted that political commentators have asked “why the PAP is asking for a strong mandate, and why it is not more magnanimous in the treatment of opponents”. 

“(These commentators) would like to see rules applied to all political participants fairly, that gerrymandering be restrained,” she said.

While Singaporeans yearn for democratic competition or competitive politics, they appear to be “repulsed” by the competitive, mean politics of some Western democracies, she noted, adding that educated and younger Singaporeans in particular “do not want to see political overkill”.

Read also: GE2020: Sengkang voters hope for new brand of politics, as WP promises ‘the hard work starts tomorrow’

WHAT COULD HAVE AFFECTED VOTE SHARE

During the lecture, Prof Chan gave her take on the issues that affected PAP’s vote share.

These spanned the party's performance as the Government in the last five years, the Government’s handling of the Covid-19 pandemic in the past five months, as well as the nine days of campaigning for GE2020.

She said that voters did not approve of the way the elected presidency was introduced and other policies such as the Protection from Online Falsehoods and Manipulation Act.

On the handling of Covid-19, she noted that it was done with a micromanaging of rules and protocols for businesses and a lack of clarity, as fears and anxieties about jobs grew.

And when it came to the hustings, “it was about messaging, communicating and the online presence and savviness of the parties”.

During a question-and-answer segment of the lecture, Prof Chan, who was in the nine-member Constitutional Commission to review the elected presidency system in 2016, was asked if she would approach the review differently with hindsight.

Following the review, constitutional amendments were passed to reserve the elected presidency for candidates of a particular racial group if there had not been a president from that group for the five most recent presidential terms.

Prof Chan stated in her reply that she supports any mechanism that allows for better representation of the country’s different ethnic groups.

Noting that the presidency is a “symbol of the country”, she added: “It must unify the country, and it must represent what the country looks like in terms of its demography in the city.”

MAKING ROOM FOR ALTERNATIVE VIEWS

Following the elections and in a post-Covid world, Prof Chan questioned if Singapore’s governance model is adequate.

She said that Singapore “must make room for alternative views” as it looks to the future with an ambition of harnessing the new economy and finding unconventional opportunities.

“To harvest the opportunities out there, to think the unthinkable, we must expand intellectual space — giving more room for expression to encourage Singaporeans, especially young Singaporeans, to be bold, to think differently, think innovatively.”

Adding that the country should “seriously discourage groupthink”, she said: “In a successful bureaucracy, it is even more necessary to allow out-of-the-box thinking within. If our political model needs fixing, it is how to accommodate differences and diverse views in our institutions and our country.”  

The civil service also needs to evolve, she said, adding that civil servants “should think very hard and make sure that we don’t allow groupthink to infect us”.

Policies should be implemented with a “human touch”, with Prof Chan calling it a “very cold implementation of policy” when people go by the playbook or standard operating procedures, or are overly concerned about practising some discretion.

“It goes to the ground. We should do it intelligently with a feel of the ground,” she said.

Asked how the young may be educated differently to thrive in a more complex political environment, she said that the challenge lies in breaking up silos built by technology and the digital world.

“We are all just going into the websites or the chat groups of, maybe, our own kind, our own values, our own politics, so we are quite siloed,” she added.

In order to break up these silos, a “whole bunch of actions, not just one action” have to happen in schools and the social space, such as consciously ensuring diversity when hiring employees or sending out invites to a party, Prof Chan said.
Read more at https://www.todayonline.com/singapore/pap-have-better-understand-millennials-win-back-votes-says-ambassador-large-chan-heng-cheeHaving made good on its promise to provide an alternative voice in Parliament, the Workers’ Party’s slick use of social media and being relatable helped it attain the opposition’s best ever showing in Singapore, says Dr Gillian Koh.

WP, Sengkang GRC walkabout on Jul 7, 2020 (3)
The Workers' Party's (WP) secretary-general Pritam Singh speaking to the media during a walkabout at Rivervale Plaza on Jul 7, 2020. (Photo: Marcus Mark Ramos)
Gillian Koh
By Gillian Koh
14 Jul 2020 06:00AM
(Updated: 14 Jul 2020 06:40AM)
 
 
 
 
Bookmark

SINGAPORE: In Singapore’s 2020 General Election (GE), while voters returned the People’s Action Party (PAP) candidates in 83 out of 93 seats in Parliament, it is the opposition Workers’ Party (WP) that stole the show.

Going into the election in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, WP held out the spectre of a PAP “clean sweep” unless voters could beat the instinctive "flight to safety" of choosing a tried and tested team. Instead, WP reminded them of the reasons why “balance” in voices and power was needed in Parliament.

The surprise was that WP was able to extend its influence from six seats to 10 by wresting a second group representation constituency (GRC) – Sengkang – in addition to WP holding Aljunied GRC and the single seat of Hougang where it was the incumbent party.

The popular vote share for WP where it contested swung by 10.7 percentage points from its GE2015 result to reach a creditable 50.5 per cent in the seats it contested.

READ: GE2020: Opposition vote swing shows people are looking beyond bread and butter issues, analysts say
READ: Commentary: The battle as Singapore heads into General Election campaigning post Nomination Day
Advertisement

Recognising this development, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong announced that WP secretary-general Pritam Singh would be invited to take up a newly created post in Singapore - the Leader of the Opposition - which in a different Westminster two-party system assumes he would head a shadow government.

Since that may be too great an ambition for WP at the moment, the post more plausibly allows Mr Singh to play the diplomatic role of meeting visiting foreign dignitaries who wish to recognise the political opposition and understand more comprehensively how democracy works in Singapore, as is the practice in countries like the United Kingdom and Australia.

Support for that modest, seductively sensible approach of “balance” came at the expense of a PAP Sengkang team of four men that included three office-holders in favour of four young politicians featuring an even mix of genders – three professionals and one civic activist. They secured 52.13 per cent of the vote in a straight fight against the PAP.

The WP Sengkang team epitomises the way the party has refreshed its ranks in its transition between former secretary-general Low Thia Khiang and Mr Singh. Mr Low, in explaining his decision not to contest in GE2020 said he was gratified there were now younger members who could appeal to people like themselves.

WP, Sengkang GRC walkabout on Jul 7, 2020 (11)
The Workers' Party (WP) candidates for Sengkang GRC, He Ting Ru and Jamus Lim, interacting with residents during a walkabout at Rivervale Plaza on Jul 7, 2020. (Photo: Marcus Mark Ramos)
ASKING HARD QUESTIONS

There were three other factors apart from demographics that might account for a revival of WP’s fortunes in GE2020. The first is it made good on its promise to provide an alternative voice in Parliament.

Post-GE2015, WP’s six duly-elected MPs, and three NCMPs not only engaged in robust debates with the PAP frontbench on policies but emphasised in this election’s party broadcasts they had voted against bills and constitutional amendments when they felt they had to.

Think of their November 2016 opposition to the changes to the elected presidency system and May 2019 opposition to the Prevention of Online Falsehoods and Manipulation Act.

These did not just provide public profile to the MPs but demonstrated how seriously they were prepared to “deny the PAP a blank cheque”, another key message of its campaign.

READ: GE2020: Envision a Singapore with both tangible achievements and intangible ideals, says WP's Sylvia Lim
READ: GE2020: Votes for the Workers' Party will count in 3 ways, says Pritam Singh
The WP also campaigned like other opposition candidates did, to deny the PAP a supermajority or 62 seats so that it would not be able to push through constitutional changes in the House.

This was an ambition that Mr Singh had set out at WP’s annual members’ forum in January 2019. He said it was a goal that would make “any government sensitive to the pulse of the people and their welfare, allowing any ruling party to govern without gridlock while promoting the political openness that so many of us yearn for in Singapore."

In essence, they had set up a record of “asking tough questions of the government”, in Mr Singh’s words, to convince voters the WP could play such a role.

THE SOCIAL MEDIA FACTOR

Second, even if this had not been an election held in the midst of a pandemic where mass meetings were disallowed, greater mastery of social media would be critical for a successful campaign. In this regard, WP seemed to have its ducks in a row for impactful communication.

READ: Commentary: Why do humble backgrounds matter as candidates standing for Singapore’s General Election?
READ: 'It's crunch time': Opposition parties react to GE2020 announcement, WP puts up video featuring Nicole Seah
The constraints to in-person mass meetings were more than overcome through its Hammer Show and Instagram stories. These were tailored to younger voters, who in past post-election surveys by the Institute of Policy Studies, was the segment more inclined to support the notion of political contestation, turn to the internet for election material and act as swing voters.

While other parties also had their online outreach, to win at the game, candidates have to be personable and authentic.

In its communications strategy, the Sengkang team was empowered to stamp its own mark to convey how they were “insiders” in the constituency. They said they were like their residents - people with young families. They discussed the amenities that residents wished for. This was not a cookie-cutter approach to engagement. They came across as relatable.

Even more critically, Mr Singh provided a masterclass in crisis communications when he was quick to allow the WP candidate in Sengkang, Raeesah Khan, to respond to a brewing controversy over her remarks about alleged unfair treatment of public authorities in two social media posts in 2018 and May this year.


Mr Singh acknowledged concerns head-on and said his party would deal with it after the election, a line that matched the PAP’s in the “trial by Internet” of the potential candidate it had to withdraw, Ivan Lim.

He also said his party did not expect its members to sanitise their past to be on its ticket. This message of “taking people as they come”, of not expecting perfection and backing up one’s candidate quickly, would have appealed to voters.

His composure and responsible leadership was noted online. On the other hand, the PAP may have suffered a backlash for what happened to Ms Khan even if it is unclear if it was directly linked to surfacing her posts.

GOOD LOCAL GOVERNANCE

Third, WP signalled it accepted that voters do have the right to expect good local governance from it.

In his Nomination Day speech, Mr Singh apologised for falling short in the past and promised to do better. The idea of restitution, of setting things right and humility, is again reinforced and a good motivator for support among ordinary citizens.

Importantly, against the backdrop of an appeal to the High Court ruling on the civil case brought against the Aljunied - Hougang Town Council (AHTC) team of leaders for the dereliction of their fiduciary duties, Mr Singh highlighted in a Constituency Political Broadcast on Jul 2 that AHTC’s financial statements had been given a clean and unqualified opinion in 2019 and the Ministry of National Development had also placed Aljunied GRC in a satisfactory green banding for corporate governance.

Pritam Singh PPB Jul 2
Pritam Singh from the Workers' Party speaking during a Party Political Broadcast on Jul 2, 2020.
This would have set some voters’ minds at ease about supporting the team. The WP was able to hold Aljunied GRC with a 9 percentage point rise in support vis-à-vis its GE2015 score.

The outcome has been a positive one for Singapore. It signals elections here are not just contestable but provide balance, discipline and the need for accountability upon the dominant PAP and opposition parties in Parliament.

This is in an age of rage where publics in democracies around the world feel they lack effective channels to voice their dissent. 

Some may argue the first-past-the-post-system does not do justice to the fact that 61.24 per cent support for the PAP translated to it taking 90 per cent of the seats in Parliament, but we can be assured that in GE2020, this vital function of parliamentary elections has taken Singapore into the green banding of democratic health.Singapore GE2020: Signs of young voters' crucial role in election outcome
1 of 3

Voters at Poi Ching School polling station in Tampines on Polling Day. The swing against the PAP is seen by experts as an indication of the need to better incorporate younger perspectives. ST PHOTO: ARIFFIN JAMAR
Voters at Poi Ching School polling station in Tampines on Polling Day. The swing against the PAP is seen by experts as an indication of the need to better incorporate younger perspectives. ST PHOTO: ARIFFIN JAMAR
PUBLISHED4 HOURS AGO
FACEBOOKTWITTER
Feb, post-GE polls show incidents during hustings may have caused youth swing towards opposition
Clement Yong 
Jean Iau 
The first signs that young voters might have been crucial in the outcome of last Friday's general election came early on Saturday morning as the results were still sinking in.

Asked at the People's Action Party's (PAP) press conference if the ruling party had lost the youth vote, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong said young people have "very significantly different life aspirations and priorities". He had just seen a nearly nine-point vote swing against his party, with a record 10 opposition candidates winning seats in Parliament.

From analysts to politicians, many have since portrayed the swing against the PAP - almost every win came with a reduced share of the vote - as an indication of the need to better incorporate younger perspectives.


Former MP Inderjit Singh, in a Facebook post on Sunday, said millennials were the group who most likely voted against the PAP. He estimated that more than half of young voters had cast their ballot for the opposition.

A day earlier, Law and Home Affairs Minister K. Shanmugam, touching on Singapore's approach to race relations, said a new framework might be needed to take into account "how (young) people feel that there's a different way of discussing these things beyond the traditional".

Yet, a poll conducted by The Straits Times in February found little hint of young voters turning away from the ruling party in the months leading up to the election, suggesting that the swing against the PAP in this age group might have been caused by events closer to Polling Day.

Voting patterns among a sample size of 400 first-time voters in February were somewhat similar to how their parents may vote. Between February and March, the poll found that bread-and-butter concerns - the cost of living, as well as job and housing prospects - dominated respondents' list of worries.

More tellingly, 36.5 per cent of them said they were inclined to vote for the PAP, more than double the 15.5 per cent who said they were leaning towards the opposition; about half were undecided.

A sample of the same voters were contacted again after Polling Day and many said they had changed their minds, and backed the opposition.

Their reasons included specific incidents that occurred during the hustings and a comparison of party manifestos, which led them to rethink what they valued and hoped to see in Singapore's future. Most said they were not voting opposition for opposition's sake.

Marketing executive Callista Khoo, a 22-year-old first-time voter, ended up voting for the Workers' Party (WP) in Marine Parade GRC despite her admiration for Mr Tan Chuan-Jin, who anchors the PAP team there.

EVEN IF IT'S NOT YOUR REALITY...

Singaporeans need to realise that just because this is not your reality, doesn't mean that it isn't someone else's lived reality. We really should get out of our own shells and realise that there are so many Singaporeans out there who are living on the sidelines, and we need to start paying more attention to these vulnerable individuals in our communities.

COMMUNICATIONS STUDENT ANNABELLE LIM, 24, who will be graduating from university this year. She is concerned about job prospects as the pursuit of her dream job - working in the arts - has been derailed by the Covid-19 pandemic but she feels economic policies should not come at the expense of issues like income inequality and race and gender discrimination.

 

VALUING DIVERSITY IN LEGISLATURE

Consumption of alternative media from a young age and a rather developed sense of social consciousness have empowered young voters, have led us to question the status quo and value diversity in the legislature... Income inequality and ageism in the workplace are still very pertinent issues. More can be done to ensure that the elderly do not have to do back-breaking work in their later years. This has carry-on effects for my generation as well, who would soon grow up to be the sandwich generation. I would like to see candidates/parties looking into and tackling these problems more proactively.

LAW STUDENT GWENDOLYN OH, 22.

CLIMATE CHANGE AN EXISTENTIAL PROBLEM

For me, climate change right now supersedes the issue of jobs. Jobs are very important and we should be preparing for that, but climate change is an existential problem.

PUBLIC RELATIONS TRAINEE YOGESH TULSI, 25.

"I respect the way Mr Tan articulates his thoughts and interacts with people. Then I saw the WP candidate from my GRC recite a pantun," she said, referring to WP candidate Fadli Fawzi's speech on Nomination Day, in which he recited a Malay poem calling on his audience to "light the fires in your will".

She respected his nod to traditional Malay poetry as she felt there was a heavy emphasis on Chinese values in society here.

Ms Khoo then found Mr Fadli's Twitter account and was impressed by the newcomer's views and professionalism. She said: "I realised I needed to give WP my vote because they deserve a chance for more voices in Parliament.

"How else will voters make an informed decision about credibility if the opposition lacks the equivalent of the PAP's opportunities and platforms to prove themselves?"

Ms Zhang Feng Fang, a politics and economics undergraduate, said she was quite frustrated during the nine days of campaigning as many in her circle had swung towards the opposition. The PAP supporter said: "The opposition had a much better social media game but I also think a lot of youth had their own echo chambers for opposition online."

Ms Zhang, 22, said she did not make any public comments online in support of the PAP because she feared that she would be seen as not supportive of her friends from the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer (LGBTQ) community.

In the end, she voted for the team helmed by Defence Minister Ng Eng Hen in Bishan-Toa Payoh GRC when her parents told her not to "bite the hand that feeds you".

For East Coast GRC resident Gerald Sim, 23, several events during the campaign pushed him towards the opposition.

He cited the verbal slip-up by Deputy Prime Minister Heng Swee Keat during his Nomination Day speech as one thing which raised doubts about whether he should be voting for the PAP leader.

The intern at a local museum also said he was put off by the PAP's demand on July 6 that the WP state its position on Sengkang GRC candidate Raeesah Khan's Facebook posts. Ms Raeesah is now under investigation for allegedly promoting enmity between different groups on grounds of religion or race.

The incident, he said, was "a show of political mudslinging".

"It undermines my trust in the incumbent party even more when it resorts to delivering low blows by blowing out of proportion comments made by Ms Raeesah as a private citizen," he added.

More than 6,000 like-minded individuals joined a Facebook group called "We Stand Behind Raeesah!", while an online petition made the rounds, saying: "Let Raeesah Khan campaign in peace. Conduct any investigations after the elections." It garnered more than 19,000 signatures before Polling Day.

Young voters and observers believe the PAP's targeting of Ms Raeesah, 26, who has been an activist for the rights of the marginalised since she was 17, backfired on the party for its perceived high-handedness.

Mr G. Kiran, 25, who recently graduated from the Singapore Management University's law faculty, said: "Some young voters might have empathised with the difficult position Ms Raeesah was caught in because of the similarity in age, and the nature of social media, which has provided platforms for users to pen brief and candid thoughts.

"Younger people may have been concerned about freedom of speech and expression when the police said they were investigating her over her alleged online comments."

Others pointed out that systemic inequalities do exist in the country and that Ms Raeesah was courageous to point them out.

Apart from push factors, there were also pull factors for younger Singaporeans to vote opposition. These included the WP's proposals to tighten employment pass approvals and lower the age from 35 to 28 for singles to apply for Build-to-Order Housing Board flats.

Undergraduate Martyn Danial, 25, a Choa Chu Kang resident, said he was attracted to the WP's policies, although it did not contest in his GRC. He said: "The WP's manifesto resonated with me because it would have directly affected those around my age group who are about to join the workforce."

Related Story
GE2020: Younger voters make their mark in polls
Related Story
Singapore GE2020: Deepening appeal to a younger generation of voters
Related Story
Singapore GE2020: Lessons learnt from Singapore's first true Internet election
For Mr Sim, it was the tone of the WP team's "simple message of kindness", which he said gelled with his values. "I don't want to be extremely successful and rich while down the ladder, there are people who have difficulty putting food on the table."

CHOOSING BETWEEN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES
Although the Elections Department does not release figures for the number of first-time voters, there were 229,900 Singapore citizens aged 20 to 24 as of June last year, according to the Government's Population in Brief report.

They likely reached the voting age between the 2015 election and this one, making up nearly 10 per cent of the 2.65 million Singaporeans eligible to vote this election.

WP chairman Sylvia Lim, in a recent interview with Bloomberg news agency, weighed in on whether the youth vote was a key factor in the swing towards the opposition.

She said that although in Sengkang, the 26 to 44 age range of the WP team matched the profile of voters there and likely contributed to her party's win in the GRC, "nationwide, I'm not able to say right now whether the younger voters tipped the balance overall".

All voters, young or old, will make their own calculations, she added.

"I don't think they will, in general, vote just as a protest, but they will also look at what is at stake, who is providing the alternative and whether they think they can accept that person as their MP," said Ms Lim.

Young voters who spoke to The Straits Times echoed this view. Many of them said their decision was never a toss-up only between who they thought could provide "jobs, jobs, jobs" - a PAP election slogan popularised by Foreign Minister Vivian Balakrishnan during a televised debate - and which party could facilitate other sociopolitical goals like greater equality.

Rather, they rejected the idea that they had to choose between economic issues and issues like social inequality, and instead, leaned towards candidates from whichever party that had plans for both areas.

Public relations trainee Yogesh Tulsi, 25, said he is anxious about jobs and getting Singapore out of its economic slump but thinks climate crisis and civil liberties are also, if not more, pressing concerns.

"Climate change is an existential problem that I want to see a lot more planning for," he said.

For some millennials, the Government's largely successful handling of the Covid-19 pandemic was not enough to guarantee their votes.

Ms Nur Dyana Abu Bakar, 25, who works in the hard-hit aviation sector, said the Government has been largely efficient in handling the Covid-19 outbreak - and is glad to hear friends overseas praise Singapore for it. But issues such as the pace of development, the rising cost of living and transparency of government data are her top priorities.

She said: "We should be able to know how much of taxpayers' money is going where, or what the Government is focusing on. I don't mind higher taxes if I know that the money is going towards something good for Singapore."

However, there are young voters who agree with the PAP's focus on economic policies. Law undergraduate Clement Lim, 24, said he supported the ruling party's emphasis on jobs and skills upgrading because it is "about encouraging people to be independent and not depend on government handouts".

The PAP Youth Wing member, who volunteers in Jurong GRC, added that the PAP still has many "MPs and leaders who genuinely care about society and its people".

Mr Lim said: "I often see MPs who go the extra mile to ensure that the needs of their residents are taken care of. Regular dialogue sessions are held where ministers try to understand societal concerns, and explain the Government's approach to dealing with them."

For him, the election results meant that the PAP should rethink its strategy for engaging younger voters, rather than embark on a directional overhaul.

SOCIAL MEDIA APPEAL
With restrictions in place due to the coronavirus pandemic, this election took place largely online - a milieu in which digital natives like millennials are very much at home.

Related Story
GE2020: Full results for Singapore election
Related Story
S'pore GE microsite: Follow our full coverage
The social media presence of candidates acquired greater weight, and how eloquent and presentable they were played a greater role. The personalities of individual candidates also came under more scrutiny than they would have in past hustings.

Several PAP politicians, such as Speaker of Parliament Tan Chuan-Jin, 51, have earned plaudits for their online outreach efforts.

Mr Tan became a local Twitter sensation earlier this year for responding or "clapping back" at a netizen who confused him with Trade and Industry Minister Chan Chun Sing. The netizen said: "Hello sir! I stan!" Mr Tan replied: "Hello. I Tan." Stan is slang for an overzealous fan.

Public relations and events executive Joel Lim, 27, said it was important for candidates to reach out to young voters online. He said: "A large majority of (first-time voters) are active users of digital platforms, which are also where they have their discussions with their peers and, more importantly, obtain information."

Mr Lim posted bite-size political analyses on his Instagram account and gained more than 11,000 new followers during the election campaign. The first episode of his series, called Political Prude, drew more than 10,000 views.

Opposition candidates also performed well.

Singapore Democratic Party (SDP) chairman Paul Tambyah, an infectious diseases expert, was among those whose credentials were lauded on social media by young voters, who felt opposition candidates like him were equal in calibre to those fielded by the PAP.

Others, like Progress Singapore Party (PSP) chief Tan Cheng Bock, got young assistants to help him better tap the online psyche of millennials. The 80-year-old experimented with millennial and Gen Z slang such as "hypebeast" - a person in tune with the latest trends - and became an unlikely Instagram hit for his "hypebeast ah gong" persona.

A day before Cooling-off Day, SDP secretary-general Chee Soon Juan mixed jokes with appeals for more democratic rights in an interview with online personality Preeti Nair, better known as Preetipls. The video was widely circulated.

Still, it is not clear how much candidates' social media appeal translated into votes - Prof Tambyah, Dr Chee and Dr Tan all lost by narrow margins.

Also, young voters said keeping an online presence was not everything, and that on-the-ground efforts mattered.

MacPherson resident Soh Jun Ming, 27, said his MP Tin Pei Ling is popular for the effort she takes to be present on the ground.

He said: "We occasionally see her jogging around the neighbourhood to greet some of the residents, and she has also impacted the lives of several of my neighbours, especially during this trying period."

The financial consultant added: "Some of my neighbours also said it is hard to vote for opposition members if we don't see them contributing to the neighbourhood."

Ms Tin, 36, romped home to victory for the second time in the single seat, sweeping up 71.74 per cent of the votes in a contest against the People's Power Party secretary-general Goh Meng Seng.

National University of Singapore sociologist Tan Ern Ser said of the youth vote: "Whether or not they constitute a significant proportion of voters, their votes are important - more so if there's a close contest."

In West Coast GRC, the PSP lost to the PAP by just 3.4 points. If more credible opposition candidates jump into the fray, the gap may continue to narrow, and this election could be a hint of what is to come.On July 11, Singaporeans woke up to a new reality. The watershed general election (GE) of 2020 had come and gone, and major shifts seem to have happened in Parliament.

With 83 out of 93 seats, the People’s Action Party (PAP) — also Singapore’s incumbent government since independence in 1965 — managed to achieve the “strong mandate” that it asked for.

Parliamentary seats GE2020
Image Credit: Vulcan Post
Though they managed to retain their supermajority in parliament, the PAP lost a significant amount of political ground.

The incumbent party relinquished two Group Representation Constituencies (GRCs) — Aljunied and Sengkang — and Hougang Single Member Constituency (SMC) to the Workers’ Party (WP).

The party’s 61.24 per cent of the popular vote was also the second lowest percentage since independence.


We have a clear mandate, but the percentage of the popular vote is not as high as I had hoped for.– PAP’s Secretary-General Lee Hsien Loong.
It is clear that Singaporean voters are trying to send a strong message to the government and the nation — what is it, and what can we take away from the GE 2020 results?

Singaporeans (Not Just WP Supporters) Want Change
This year, with the exception of MacPherson and Mountbatten SMCs, the PAP had a reduction of votes in all the constituencies it ran for (except the new ones).

How did this happen? The opposition had the odds stacked against them.

Elections held during periods of crises tend to correlate to a vote swing in favour of the PAP, due to the flight to safety mentality. In the GE 2001, the PAP received a handsome 75 per cent vote share when voters decided to opt for stability.

Furthermore, physical rallies which opposition parties tend to rely on heavily to reach out to voters were disallowed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

GE2015 and GE2020 Results
Comparison of GE 2015 and GE 2020 results / Image Credit: Vulcan Post
According to Eugene Tan, a law professor and former independent MP, most Singaporeans believe in checks and balances.

This is exactly what the opposition parties capitalised on this election to rally Singaporeans. For example, the WP’s campaign slogan was “Make Your Vote Count” and denying the PAP a “blank cheque” was a point that resurfaced during many speeches.

Furthermore, these points are further supplemented by the electorate’s bid to reject “gutter politics”.

Besides WP, which is arguably the strongest opposition party in Singapore, other parties also made significant inroads into many wards during the GE 2020.

The Progress Singapore Party (PSP) narrowly lost West Coast GRC with about 48 per cent of the popular vote.

In addition, the Singapore Democratic Party (SDP) also had its best showing since the 1990s. Its Secretary-General Chee Soon Juan scored 45.2 per cent against PAP’s S. Murali in Bukit Batok, while SDP chairman Paul Tambyah won 46.26 per cent of votes in Bukit Panjang

This points to a strong possibility that Singaporeans islandwide are ready to embrace alternative voices in parliament and accept a variety of different parties into parliament.

Personality Politics: The Jamus Effect?
Jamus Lim Workers Party
WP Candidate Jamus Lim/ Image Credits: Mothership
The personality of politicians could be a key factor in determining the votes of the electorate.

Though the PAP’s vote share fell significantly in nearly all wards, some opposition teams fared better than others.

Noticeably, Sengkang GRC was won over by WP’s young four-man team. Besides He Ting Ru who had previously run in GE 2015, all members were new faces.

However, the presence of Harvard-educated Jamus Lim in the team could have been a strong selling point for the Sengkang electorate.

The WP candidate stood out in this year’s election. He emerged as a rising star during a televised political debate, which saw him capturing the hearts and minds of Singaporeans.

Other candidates with a strong showing such as Chee Soon Juan of SDP or Tan Cheng Bock of PSP had already managed to build up their personal brand name through years of being in the political scene.

Social Media Is Important, Even In Politics
Workers' Party on Instagram
Image Credit: Workers’ Party via Instagram
This year, many young millennials and even members of Generation Z cast their votes for the first time. People in these age groups are typically fervent social media users, and spend more time on social media than traditional media.

Most opposition parties made good use of social media and networking sites to reach out to young voters.

80-year-old PSP chief Tan Cheng Bock became an internet sensation with his attempts to incorporate millennial and Gen Z lingo such as “hypebeast” and “woke” into his social media postings.

Tan Cheng Bok on Instagram
Image Credit: Tan Cheng Bock via Instagram
According to Tan, this is was a way for him to reach out and better connect to the younger electorate.

You know how much time I spent learning all these new words, my friend? I earn my votes, I never expect them.– PSP Chief Tan Cheng Bock via TodayOnline
The WP also put up an impressive online campaign, which many netizens lauded. The party’s introduction video spread like wildfire on the Internet, garnering more than 15,000 likes on Facebook.

Becoming A Post-Materialist Society
A materialist society concerns itself with material needs, bread-and-butter issues, physical and economic security.

In contrast to this, post-materialists strive for self-actualisation and values like liberalism.

In the e-rallies of WP’s Sengkang candidates, issues such as social inequality and climate change were highlighted. This seemed to resonate with the younger voters.

According to sociologist Tan Ern Ser of the National University of Singapore, Singaporeans might be adopting “higher-order, post-materialist” values.

This year’s unique elections has laid the foundation for opposition parties to gain a foothold in their various wards.

Though it remains to be observed if the rejuvenation of opposition parties has created a new dawn for Singapore, the years leading up to the next elections will be some interesting ones to watch.The recent general election has made clear that a new political culture is emerging in Singapore, said Professor Chan Heng Chee.

The veteran diplomat noted yesterday how on the one hand, the political style of the ruling People's Action Party (PAP) emphasises strong government, effectiveness, a legalistic culture and the delivery of a better life for the people - which some have called paternalistic.

On the other hand, many citizens want to see Singapore evolve into a full-fledged democracy. Observers have also expressed a desire for rules to be applied to all political participants fairly, and for gerrymandering to be restrained, she noted.


"Even as we yearn for democratic competition, competitive politics, we are asking for a kinder and gentler politics. We seem to be repulsed by the competitive, mean politics of some Western democracies," she said in a live-streamed lecture.

Prof Chan, an ambassador-at-large, was delivering the last of three lectures as the Institute of Policy Studies' 7th S R Nathan Fellow for the Study of Singapore. It was titled Singapore In A Time Of Flux: Optimism From The Jaws Of Gloom.

Giving her take on the election result - the PAP won 83 of 93 seats and 61.24 per cent of the popular vote, down from 69.9 per cent in 2015 - Prof Chan noted that youth aged 25 to 35 make up one of the biggest groups in the population.

The Workers' Party, which won an unprecedented 10 seats and a second GRC, understood this, choosing youthful candidates and issues that resonated with Generation Z voters, she added. "Clearly this age group bought the opposition message of the need for diverse voices in Parliament and the need for checks and balances,"she said.

She noted that while conventional wisdom says people become more conservative as they get older, a Pew Research report suggests that American millennials and Generation Xers (those born between 1965 and 1980) are different from generations before them and have a distinct, increasingly liberal outlook on many issues.

"I expect our millennials will continue to support diverse voices and an opposition in Parliament as a good thing, even as they age...The incumbent party will have to understand this group better to win back their vote," she added.

Prof Chan noted that Singapore had a one-party Parliament from 1968 till 1981, with politics shifting to the bureaucracy. From 1981, a repoliticisation took place, and in 2011, the desire for political change erupted with the convergence of several "deeply felt social and economic issues", such as growing inequality and immigration, she added, describing this as the arrival of "populist politics" in Singapore.

The PAP subsequently managed to improve its vote share after introducing a slew of social and economic policies, and a series of consultations in 2012 and 2013. But with GE2020, "we see a fully repoliticised Singapore", she added.

In her lecture, Prof Chan offered a few ideas on how Singapore's governance model can shift. While the number of opposition parties has increased, there is also a "new mushrooming" of civil society organisations attracting young, educated and idealistic people, she said.

"The recent Covid-19 pandemic shows that civil society organisations have a role to play as an early warning system for social issues and fissures in society... no matter how unwelcome the feedback," said Prof Chan. These issues include the plight of abused women, the ageing poor, and foreign workers. The Government can work more closely with these groups, as both have common goals, she suggested.

More room for expression must also be given to encourage Singaporeans, especially the young, to think innovatively . "We should seriously discourage groupthink," she said. "If our political model needs fixing, it is how to accommodate differences and diverse views in our institutions and our country."

There is also a need to keep chipping away at the issue of inequality in order to guard against the threat of populism returning to Singapore's politics, she said. Critics have rightly pointed out that Singapore has high inequality compared with other developed economies, Prof Chan said. But she noted that Singapore's income figures show "tentative change in the right direction", compared with the industrialised democracies of the United States and Europe where incomes have stagnated or decreased. In the past decade, median incomes here have risen by 32 per cent in real terms.

She said Singapore is fortunate there are no ideologically conservative parties arguing against assisting the poor. "Rather, the debate is on why not give more, with the opposition pressing for bigger subsidies and giving to more groups."

The Government's response during Covid-19 attests to its understanding of societal needs, said Prof Chan, who added that its work in addressing inequality is never done .

"The goalposts change all the time, and so eliminating poverty is always a work in progress," she said.SINGAPORE - The recent general election has made clear that a new political culture is emerging in Singapore, said Professor Chan Heng Chee on Wednesday (July 15).

The veteran diplomat noted how on one hand, the political style of the ruling People's Action Party (PAP) emphasises strong government, effectiveness, a legalistic culture and the delivery of a better life for the people - which some have called paternalistic.

On the other hand, many citizens want to see Singapore evolve into a full-fledged democracy. Observers have also expressed a desire for rules to be applied to all political participants fairly, and for gerrymandering to be restrained, she noted.


"Even as we yearn for democratic competition, competitive politics, we are asking for a kinder and gentler politics. We seem to be repulsed by the competitive, mean politics of some Western democracies," she said in a lecture livestreamed on Facebook.

Prof Chan, an Ambassador-at-Large with the Foreign Ministry, was delivering the last of three lectures as the Institute of Policy Studies' 7th S R Nathan Fellow for the Study of Singapore. Wednesday's lecture was titled "Singapore in a Time of Flux: Optimism from the Jaws of Gloom".

Giving her take on the results of the election, which saw the PAP win 83 of 93 seats and 61.24 per cent of the popular vote, down from 69.9 per cent in the 2015 election, Prof Chan noted that young people aged 25 to 35 make up one of the biggest groups in the population.

The Workers' Party (WP), which won an unprecedented 10 of the 93 seats and a second GRC, clearly understood this, choosing youthful candidates and issues that resonated with Generation Z voters, she added.

"Clearly, this age group bought the opposition message of the need for diverse voices in Parliament and the need for checks and balances," said Prof Chan.

She also noted that while conventional wisdom says that people become more conservative as they get older, a Pew Research report suggests that American millennials and Generation Xers (those aged 35 to 49) are different from generations before them, including the baby boomers. They have a distinct and increasingly liberal outlook on many issues, she said.

"I expect our millennials will continue to support diverse voices and an opposition in Parliament as a good thing even as they age... The incumbent party will have to understand this group better to win back their vote," she added.

SINGAPORE'S CHANGING GOVERNANCE MODEL
Tracing the evolution of Singapore's political and governance model through the years, Prof Chan noted that a one-party Parliament prevailed from 1968, when the first general election since independence was held, till 1981, when then WP chief JB Jeyaretnam won the Anson by-election.

Related Story
Managing foreign workers, supporting SMEs are key Covid-19 issues that Singapore must tackle, says Chan Heng Chee
In the 13 years without opposition, the PAP government systematically depoliticised the political system, with politics shifting to the bureaucracy, she said.

From 1981, a repoliticisation of the administrative state took place, and in 2011, the desire for political change erupted with the convergence of several "deeply felt social and economic issues", such as growing inequality and the fast-increasing numbers of immigrants, said Prof Chan, who described this as the arrival of "populist politics" in Singapore.

The PAP subsequently managed to improve its popular vote share after introducing a slew of social and economic policies, and conducting a series of consultations in 2012 and 2013. But with GE2020, "we see a fully repoliticised Singapore", she added.

In her lecture, Prof Chan offered a few ideas on how Singapore's governance model can shift in the wake of the general election and amid a world that has been transformed by the Covid-19 pandemic.

While opposition parties have increased in number, notwithstanding the limited operational room for them, there is also a "new mushrooming" of civil society organisations attracting young, educated and idealistic people, she noted.

"The recent Covid-19 pandemic shows that civil society organisations have a role to play as an early warning system for social issues and fissures in society... no matter how unwelcome the feedback," said Prof Chan. This includes issues such as the plight of abused women, the ageing poor, and foreign workers. The Government can work more closely with these organisations, as both have common goals, she suggested.

More room for expression must also be given to encourage Singaporeans, especially the young, to think innovatively. "We should seriously discourage groupthink," she said. "If our political model needs fixing, it is how to accommodate differences and diverse views in our institutions and our country."

Related Story
S'pore GE microsite: Follow our full coverage
Related Story
GE2020: Full results for Singapore election
Related Story
Singapore GE2020: Vote signals a desire for change, but not in a hurry
Related Story
Singapore GE2020: A watershed election and new normal?
There is also a need to keep chipping away at the issue of inequality in order to guard against the threat of populism returning to Singapore's politics, she added.

Critics have rightly pointed out that Singapore has high inequality compared to other developed economies, which have lower Gini coefficients, Prof Chan said.

But she noted that Singapore's income figures show "tentative change in the right direction", compared to the industrialised democracies of the United States and Europe where incomes have stagnated or decreased. In the past decade, median incomes here have risen by 32 per cent in real terms.

Singapore is fortunate that there are no ideologically conservative parties who argue against assisting the poor, added Prof Chan. "Rather, the debate is on why not give more, with the opposition pressing for bigger subsidies and giving to more groups," she said.

The Government's response during Covid-19 attests to its understanding of societal needs, said Prof Chan, who added that its work in addressing inequality is never done.

She noted that as the country becomes more affluent, what are considered basic needs for those at the bottom 20 per cent changes, and they will require more just to ensure their situation does not become more dire. There is also the emergence of the squeezed middle class. "The goalposts change all the time, and so eliminating poverty is always a work in progress," she said.

WHAT GE2020 RESULTS MEAN FOR SINGAPORE
In the question-and-answer session following the lecture, Prof Chan said that while political systems will become more polarised as they see more competition, she does not think the election result indicates that Singapore is now divided. "We are just maturing, and it's been a healthy expression... of views."

She also said she does not think the election outcome represents a rejection of Singapore's model of good governance. "(It was) an election when grievances (due to Covid-19) were there, people were losing jobs, businesses were in trouble," she said.

Many voters also believed that the PAP would win the election, and were thus assured of the incumbency of the PAP government, though younger Singaporeans showed they yearned to have an opposition in Parliament, she added.

Asked if the group representation constituency (GRC) system should be relooked and replaced with single seats instead, Prof Chan said there is some merit to the GRC system, as it helps to ensure minority representation.

It has also proven to help not only the ruling party, but also the opposition to win several seats at one go, she said, citing the WP's wins in Aljunied and Sengkang GRCs. "I don't feel strongly about (the issue) of whether we keep GRCs or not," she said.

"The reason we had GRCs... so (that) we can ensure minority representation, was a good one. I don't see a reason to take it away."SINGAPORE: The People’s Action Party (PAP) has a “clear mandate”, but the percentage of the popular vote is not as high as Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong had hoped for, he said following the results of the 2020 General Election (GE).

The PAP won 83 out of 93 seats in Parliament, and 61.2 per cent of the popular vote. Mr Lee described the vote share as “respectable”.

Advertisement

Despite losing the new Sengkang GRC to the Workers’ Party (WP), Mr Lee said the overall result “reflects broad-based support for the PAP”.

“We have a clear mandate, but the percentage of the popular vote is not as high as I had hoped for,” he said during the PAP’s post-results press conference.

He said the PAP will take its 83-seat win in “these circumstances” as an “endorsement” of the party’s policies and plans. “We’ll take this forward and work with Singapore to realise those plans and solve the problems which we have.”

GE2020: Workers’ Party wins new Sengkang GRC with 52.13% of votes 
Advertisement

Mr Lee, the secretary-general of the PAP, said: “Singaporeans understand what’s at stake and why we must come together to uphold our national interests.”

He pledged to use this mandate “responsibly” to deal with the COVID-19 situation and economic downturn, to take Singapore “safely through the crisis and beyond”.

“The results reflect the pain and uncertainty that Singaporeans feel in this crisis, the loss of income, the anxiety about jobs, the disruption caused by the circuit breaker and the safe distancing restrictions,” he said.

This was not a “feel-good” election, he added.

At the press conference, he was accompanied by Deputy Prime Minister Heng Swee Keat, Trade and Industry Minister Chan Chun Sing, Law and Home Affairs Minister K Shanmugam, Environment and Water Resources Minister Masagos Zulkifli and Culture, Community and Youth Minister Grace Fu.

DESIRE FOR DIVERSITY OF VOICES

Mr Lee said the result also showed a “clear desire” for a diversity of voices in Parliament.

“Singaporeans want the PAP to form the government, but they, and especially the younger voters, also want to see more opposition presence in Parliament,” he said.

He added that he looks forward to the participation and contribution of the Opposition in Parliament.

He said it is “only right” that WP chief Pritam Singh be “formally designated” as the Leader of the Opposition, and that he will be provided with “appropriate staff support and resources to perform his duties”.

The WP, which also retained Aljunied GRC, will have 10 elected MPs now, up from six previously.

Pritam Singh speaking
Workers' Party secretary-general Pritam Singh speaking on Jul 11, 2020.
“Whether it works out … and whether it’s seen as a strengthening of Singapore will depend not only on what the PAP does, but also on what the Opposition does because the Opposition now has 10 MPs elected from constituencies,” said Mr Lee.

He said the ruling party will listen to Singaporeans and do its best to address their concerns, and “try to win” their support, whether or not they voted for the PAP.

When asked by the media if the party had lost the youth vote at this GE, he noted that different generations have different life experiences, and the young have significantly different life aspirations and priorities compared to the older generations.

“That’ll have to be reflected in our political process and in the Government’s policies, because in the end, the Government’s policies must be to achieve the aspirations of every generation of Singaporeans,” he said.

He hoped that new generations of Singaporeans “look critically, but with an open mind” at what previous generations have done, “examine what’s relevant and what continues to make sense to them in a new environment” and “learn from these experiences hard won by their parents and grandparents”.

This is so that they do not have to “learn them all over again and pay a high price which has already been paid”.

READ: GE2020: Workers' Party retains Aljunied GRC with wider margin against PAP
“The generations have to work together in order to achieve that and not have a disconnect, and find ourselves with no historical memory,” he said.

A "SIGNIFICANT LOSS" TO 4G LEADERSHIP

Mr Lee added that he was, naturally, disappointed at the loss of the newly formed Sengkang GRC, which the WP won with 52.13 per cent of the valid votes.

“Ng Chee Meng and his team — Lam Pin Min, Amrin Amin and Raymond Lye — always knew it was going to be a tough fight,” he said. “They gave it their all, but Sengkang voters have spoken, and we respect their decision.”

Three of the team, Mr Ng, Dr Lam and Mr Amrin, are political office-holders.

Mr Lee described it as a “major loss to my team” and to the fourth-generation leaders, especially as Mr Ng is the secretary-general of the Labour Movement.

He added that he had spoken to Mr Ng and his team to thank them and encourage them to continue serving the party and Singapore in different ways.

“The PAP will strive to win back Sengkang GRC. We’ll also continue to fight to win back Aljunied GRC and Hougang SMC,” said Mr Lee.

“My team and I will serve all Singaporeans, whichever party you voted for. Whether or not you voted for the PAP, we’ll listen to you, do our best to address your concerns and try to win your support.”

In response to questions from the media, he again pointed out that it would be a “loss” not to have the four in his team of MPs or as members of his Cabinet.

PAP Ng Chee Meng Amrin Amin Lam Pin Min St Anthony's Jun 30, 2020 (1)
The People's Action Party (PAP) team contesting in Sengkang GRC led by Ng Chee Meng, arrive at St Anthony's Canossian School on Jun 30, 2020. (Photo: Hanidah Amin)
“But we’ll move forward and move on from here, as we did after Aljunied went to the Opposition in 2011,’ he added.

LOOKING BEYOND THE ELECTIONS

With the elections over, Mr Lee said “we need to put all our differences aside, close ranks and work together on the task at hand, which is to get us through the crisis”.

The challenges ahead call for not only a whole-of-Government response, but a whole-of-the-nation response. 

He noted that the new PAP team will include 24 first-time MPs, who will “reinforce the renewal process” of the party. The new candidates have performed well, he said, mentioning candidates like Ms Gan Siow Huang and Mr Yip Hon Weng, both of whom contested in single-seat constituencies as “newbies”.

“Thank you for giving them the chance to show what they can do for you,” he said.

In response to a question on what he would say to the business community following the election results, Mr Lee said the PAP Government would “continue to fight to persuade them” that Singapore is worthy of their confidence and investment.

“We'll demonstrate that this is so by the way we take Singapore forward from here,” he said.

“It also depends on how the Opposition conducts itself to convince them that, in fact, there is, in Singapore, responsible opposition who understand the national interest and put that before party politics.”

Mr Heng said the work of restructuring Singapore’s economy and transforming industries “must continue”.

“The work of protecting jobs, saving jobs and creating new jobs must continue,” he said as he echoed Mr Lee's view in adding that “the Opposition must be prepared to work together in order to safeguard our national interest”.

Mr Lee also said that while he has been preparing the 4G team to take over the reins for many years, he did not expect to meet with an “overwhelming” crisis in the “last stretch” of his leadership.

With his older colleagues, he will see the crisis through, he reaffirmed.

“I’m determined to hand over Singapore intact and in good working order to the next team,” he said, adding that the work of the new government begins “at once”.

“My government will work with all of you to overcome the present health and economic crisis and emerge stronger,” he said. “With this election now behind us, let’s work as one Singapore to secure our lives, our jobs and our future.”SINGAPORE: The Workers’ Party's candidates need to keep their feet "firmly grounded" after poll results which saw it take a second Group Representation Constituency, party chief and now leader of the opposition Pritam Singh said on Saturday (Jul 11).

“Indeed, I’m very grateful to all the voters in Hougang, Aljunied and Sengkang for trusting us with their vote but I’m also very humbled by it,” he said in a doorstop interview early Saturday.

“I’m not feeling euphoric at all. In fact, I think there’s a lot of work to do and I think we’ve got to work hard.”

WP now has 10 seats in Parliament with five from Aljunied GRC, four in Sengkang GRC and one in Hougang SMC, which has been held by a WP MP since 1991.

Workers' Party supporters celebrate at Block 322 along Hougang Avenue 5 Jul 11, 2020 (3)
Workers’ Party supporters celebrate along Hougang Avenue 5 on Jul 11, 2020. (Photo: Marcus Ramos)
He said that he will be reminding the WP candidates who did well at the General Election to keep their feet grounded.

Advertisement

“I expect them to keep their feet firmly grounded and remember why they’re doing what they’re doing," he said. 

"And if we can move forward in that manner, wanting to speak up for Singaporeans in a rational, responsible way like how a credible opposition should, then I think we can make some progress,” he added.

When asked if the WP’s election messages resonated with voters, Mr Singh said that his party will have to “review the campaign in a more in-depth way”.




The party bettered its result in Aljunied by nearly 9 per cent, beating the PAP team with 59.93 per cent of votes to 40.07 per cent. 


In Hougang, second-time WP candidate Dennis Tan held on to the party’s stronghold with a 61.19 per cent vote share against PAP’s Lee Hong Chuang.

“The Hougang spirit has spoken clearly today. Today’s results show why Hougang is known as the beacon of democracy in singapore. Thank you for keeping faith with the Workers’ Party beyond the past 29 years,” said Mr Tan, speaking in a video on Facebook. 


SENGKANG GRC WIN

Sengkang GRC was the surprise result of the night, with the WP team of mostly newbies beating a PAP team with three political office holders.

WP won the new Sengkang GRC with 52.13 per cent of the vote against the 47.87 per cent by the People’s Action Party (PAP).

The WP team - Ms He Ting Ru, Dr Jamus Lim, Ms Raeesah Khan and Mr Louis Chua - edged out a PAP slate helmed by Minister in the Prime Minister’s Office Ng Chee Meng alongside Dr Lam Pin Min, Mr Amrin Amin and new face Raymond Lye. 

Workers’ Party supporters celebrate along Hougang Avenue 5 on Jul 11, 2020 (1)
Workers’ Party supporters celebrate the results of the General Election along Hougang Avenue 5 on Jul 11, 2020. (Photo: Marcus Ramos)
Speaking in a video on Facebook after the results for Sengkang were announced, Ms He thanked the PAP team for “a clean and decent fight”. 

She also thanked Singaporeans who supported WP’s Sengkang team throughout its campaign and those who voted for them. 

“Thank you so much for the trust and the leap of faith that you have taken in our team here today. We will work hard to make sure that this trust is not misplaced,” she said. 

Adding that she was touched by the number of young people who came forward to walk and volunteer with the Sengkang WP team, Ms He said: “And I actually feel that this is really important for the future of our country, and this bodes very very well for us.

“Finally, to the residents of Sengkang. We work for all of you. Tomorrow, we start work. Thank you.”


Dr Lim, speaking last, said: “It warms the cockles of our hearts to be able to work for the people of Sengkang and for all Singaporeans. 

“We hope that we've inspired you, all of you to believe that the dream of an alternative future is only as far away as the courage to seize the opportunities that come your way, only as difficult as the passion you bring to pursue what you believe to be right, and only as difficult as your willingness to put your nose down to the grind and make it happen.” 

CREDIBLE PERFORMANCE IN EAST COAST, MARINE PARADE GRCS

WP also did credibly in the hotly contested East Coast GRC against a PAP team led by Deputy Prime Minister Heng Swee Keat. 

The team of Terence Tan, Nicole Seah, Ron Tan, Kenneth Foo and new face Abdul Shariff Aboo Kassim were among the best losers this General Election, garnering 46.59 per cent of the votes cast.  

“We went into this knowing that it was going to be a tough fight. And we gave it our best, and we gave it all for all of you,” said Ms Seah. 

“The votes and the encouragement that we received showed us that a very large part of East Coast GRC voters do want to see more fairness in our political system."

Workers' Party supporters celebrate at Block 322 along Hougang Avenue 5 Jul 11, 2020 (5)
Workers’ Party supporters celebrate along Hougang Avenue 5 on Jul 11, 2020. (Photo: Marcus Ramos)
In Marine Parade, WP garnered 42.24 per cent of the vote, increasing its share of the vote from the 2015 General Election. 

The WP team comprises former Non-Constituency Member of Parliament Yee Jenn Jong, Mr Nathaniel Koh, Mr Fadli Fawzi, Mr Ron Tan and Mr Azhar Abdul Latip. This is the third time WP has sent a team to contest in Marine Parade. 

This is the constituency’s first General Election without former Emeritus Senior Minister Goh Chok Tong. Dr Tan See Leng, Mr Edwin Tong, FairPrice Group CEO Seah Kian Peng and new face Mr Mohd Fahmi Aliman make up the PAP team led by former Speaker of Parliament Tan Chuan-Jin. 

“I want Singapore to believe that Singapore has more than just one Team A, and today you see the result of that happening. So I want Singapore to continue to believe that, yes, we can be stronger even with diverse opinions,” said Mr Yee.The votes have been casted and tallied. Here’s how Singapore’s fate lies until the next election. WhenNUS Department of Political Science, Deputy Head of Department Professor Bilveer Singh predicted that the People’s Action Party (PAP) would win by a landslide, he missed the mark. Two words: Narrow margins. But before we get into the details, let’s look at how the elections played out this year.

2020 was history in the making

This election saw the longest list of political parties, and for the second time since Singapore's history, all 93 parliamentary seats were contested. And there were the unique circumstances. Covid-19 eliminated physical rallies. These, no matter the public’s political stance, have historically been attended by large crowds curious on hearing the speeches and manifestos of the opposition parties. 

Despite the lack of physical rallies, the campaigning was far from placid. In the absence of traditional campaigning, there were live debates and daily broadcasts. And unlike previous elections, voters had no excuses to be ill-informed with the wealth of information available to read non-biased news.

Social media, in particular, was aflame with infographics. Protection from Online Falsehoods and Manipulation Act (POFMAs) were invoked and police reports were filed with allegations of a candidate promoting enmity between different groups on grounds of religion or race.   


This year we also saw some of the most headline-making opposition candidates. Tan Cheng Bock of Progress Singapore Party (PSP) won the hearts of the millennials and Gen Z with his 'hypebeast' videos. Lee Hsien Loong’s brother Lee Hsien Yang joined PSP to campaign, but not to contest.

The Worker's Party's crowd favourite Jamus Lim wowed with his intelligence and eloquence at the debate, while Raeesah Khan started an entire movement called #IStandWithRaeesah. The ruling party also made a few viral gaffes, while a candidate withdrew his candidacy based on allegations of his past behaviour.

The big battles
The People's Action Party (PAP) took 93 seats while The Worker's Party (WP) won 10, a record high for the opposition. They put up a strong fight, and it showed. The PAP's popular vote clinched 61.24 percent. In comparison, in 2015, the party secured a vote share of 69.9 percent.

There were close battles. In Bukit Panjang SMC, a contest between PAP's Liang Eng Hwa and Singapore Democratic Party (SDP) chairman Professor Paul Tambyah, the ruling party scored a vote share of 53.74 percent leaving Tambyah with a remaining 46.26 percent. In Bukit Batok SMC, Murali Pillai and SDP chief Chee Soon Juan faced off more once. PAP secured 54.8 percent of votes with SDP scoring 45.2 percent.

When compared to the previous by-election, this is a win for SDP's voters as the margin of victory dropped from 22.4 percent to 9.6. In West Coast GRC, PSP walked away with 48.31 percent of votes; 3.38 percentage points behind the PAP. In the hotly contested East Coast GRC, the PAP won 53.41 percent of votes while WP clinched 46.59 percent of the votes cast.



With larger margins in this election, WP retained Aljunied Group Representation Constituency (GRC) at 59.93 percent vote share and Hougang Single Member Constituency (SMC) at 61.19% percent. It also claimed the new Sengkang GRC with a vote share of 52.13 percent.

While WP chief Pritam Singh thanked his voters, he cautioned that he will be reminding the party's winning candidates to "keep their feet firmly grounded and remember why they're doing what they're doing".



"We have a clear mandate but the percentage of the popular vote is not as high as I had hoped for," concluded Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong in a wrap-up conference. "I will use this mandate responsibly to deal with Covid-19, and the economic downturn, and to take us safely through the crisis and beyond," he assured.

For the full results, head to the Elections Department Singapore website.

The post GE2020 results: Record highs and close fights between the PAP and opposition parties appeared first on Prestige Online - Singapore.Giving a speech after the electoral results for the Progress Singapore Party (PSP), Secretary-General Dr Tan Cheng Bock thanked voters for their support.

He said: “My young team didn’t win a seat but I must say we have caused an effect in this General Elections. We may not have won the seats but if you look at the level of support given to the PSP candidates, (it) will roughly go to I think an average of about 40 per cent. That is my guess. So an average of 40 per cent for a new party”.

The People’s Action Party (PAP) team emerged victorious at the West Coast Group Representation Constituency (GRC) in this year’s elections, winning against the Progress Singapore Party (PSP), with 51.69 per cent of the votes.

The PAP saw 71,545 votes, with PSP garnering 66,871 votes (48.39 per cent). A total of 138,416 votes were cast, with 1,645 votes rejected.

“I am actually quite proud of that performance. I think it is a beginning of a new chapter for PSP and I think the movement that I created will grow. We aren’t too deterred by this disappointment because I think the team that I have built will go further in the next election. I told them, I told my men, sometimes, you get defeated once but next round we will come back”, Dr Tan added.

“Our GRCs performed very well. For the singles it is about there, maybe just 39 (per cent). So I think on average we have really done pretty well and I will like to say that we will continue to work in the areas that we have stood”, said Dr Tan.

Led by Dr Tan, the PSP has fielded 24 candidates in this General Election.

The party contested in four Group Representation Constituencies (GRCs) – namely West Coast, Nee Soon, Tanjong Pagar and Chua Chu Kang – as well as five Single Member Constituencies (SMCs) – Hong Kah North, Pioneer, Yio Chu Kang, Kebun Baru and Marymount. /TISG